## Building tables

Black builds a table shape.

<!-- fig. 1.2.1 -->
Black’s one-point jump emerges reinforced.

<!-- fig. 1.2.2 -->
Now White is likely to occupy the key point for eyes.

<!-- fig. 1.2.3 -->
Black plays the firm bamboo joint shape with 5, to prevent White connecting along the edge.

<!-- fig. 1.2.4 -->
Without the White stone on the side, Black might instead play this way. The cutting point at A remains, Black 5
works to take one liberty off White’s two-stone chain, and Black has the chance of making an eye with a play at B.

<!-- fig. 1.2.5 -->
Because White has bad shape Black 1 here is hard to answer. White cannot prosper in this fight. Therefore the cutting point needs immediate defence.

<!-- fig. 1.2.6 -->
In some cases Black can even set up an obstinate ko.

<!-- fig. 1.2.7 -->
In contrast consider what may happen if Black plays 3 as here.

<!-- fig. 1.2.8 -->
If White continues by sacrificing one stone, Black’s result is a failure from the point of view of shape – the marked Black stone is doing little work, it is much too close to a Black group that is now strong. Efficiency is a major factor in go.

<!-- fig. 1.2.9 -->
In other circumstances Black may choose a different plan.

<!-- fig. 1.2.10 -->
The intention is to sacrifice one stone. In that diagram White 8 connects below 4. After Black 9 the Black group has developed good shape in the centre; and the earlier exchange of the two marked stones clearly favours Black. The single stone capture with 4 and 6 is a famous shape.

> ### The ponnuki
>
> <!-- fig. 1.2.11 -->
This strong shape, resulting from the capture of a single stone in the centre of the board, is called ponnuki. There > is a proverb saying "ponnuki is worth thirty points".
>
Roughly speaking, that means the three White plays (net – > Black has had a stone captured) making up the shape each have
value ten points. This is normal for plays in the middle of the game. But if the ponnuki is confined, as in the example shown immediately above, its influence is less, and its value also. When it occurs in the centre of the board, a > ponnuki may have considerable influence.
>
> <!-- fig. 1.2.12 -->
> This is a common position in which it may be a good exchange
> for White to make a ponnuki, at the cost of many points in the corner. The full value of White 2 and 4 will be seen in the middlegame fighting.
>
> <!-- fig. 1.2.13 -->
Here, after a 3-3 invasion, it should be better for White to make the capture of the single stone in the left-hand diagram, even though Black then recaptures the corner. The White group formed by the ponnuki is quite robust: it has good eye shape already, and White probably doesn’t need to > add a stone to it immediately.
>
> <!-- fig. 1.2.13 -->
In this diagram White takes the corner, but Black has good outside influence. When Black captures with 6 it is a matter of taking off a stone caught in a ladder, before a ladderbreaker is played. It also forms a ponnuki shape. Black has a cutting point, but otherwise thick shape useful in fighting. The value of 30 points put on a ponnuki by the proverb must be qualified, as we have seen, when it is prevented from exerting full influence; but also when too > close to other influence.