## Fighting: the liberty problem

<!-- fig. 2.4.1 -->
<!-- fig. 2.4.2 -->
<!-- fig. 2.4.3 -->
<!-- fig. 2.4.4 -->
Here’s a sad story in four parts. Black tries hard to break out, but simply has too few liberties. As soon as White plays 5, Black’s shape is deficient in liberties. The end comes after Black 20 connects, leaving only three liberties.Capturing a single stone with 16 cannot be relied upon to gain liberties, if it only makes a false eye. In fighting even a single liberty matters.

<!-- fig. 2.4.5 -->
<!-- fig. 2.4.6 -->
Considering liberties alone, Black 1 is the key point; it gives Black five liberties, while both Black A and Black B make empty triangles, and only four liberties. For that reason White 1 is a good way to attack.

<!-- fig. 2.4.7 -->
You sometimes give greater priority to adding a second dimension to a group. Black 1 here aims at playing 3 (left).

<!-- fig. 2.4.8 -->
But if White answers at 2 (right), Black’s shape is slack, with a weak point at A. So Black 1 is poor shape.

<!-- fig. 2.4.9 -->
It would be better to jump at 1. If White plays the one of the key points, 2 in the left-hand diagram, Black’s table shape with 3 becomes very good, leaving a choice of A or B next.

<!-- fig. 2.4.10 -->
(Right) Black 3 is still usually good, but Black will have to watch for the possible weakness at C as the game continues, because White 2 has caused a shortage of liberties. In this case Black might sometimes instead wish to play 3 at C, a bamboo joint. (Cf. 1.3).

<!-- fig. 2.4.11 -->
The plays shown here are the unique ways for Black to win the capturing races. On the left Black gains two liberties by extending from a chain. (This is a nose play in the sense of 4.3).

<!-- fig. 2.4.12 -->
(Right) Black links two chains: other connecting plays, for example the bamboo joint, yield fewer liberties. Empty triangles are _what-you-see-is-what-you-get_, for counting liberties.

<!-- fig. 2.4.13 -->
In this case Black is behind on a count of liberties. What about Black 1?

<!-- fig. 2.4.14 -->
Can Black gain enough liberties along the edge after 5?

<!-- fig. 2.5.15 -->
After the throw-in 6 it becomes clear that Black is behind in the race (9 connects at 6).

<!-- fig. 2.5.16 -->
In fact Black should concentrate on reducing White’s liberties (right). There Black wins because White must connect. Black 1 or 3 is the key point in this capturing race.

> ### Summary on fighting shape
>
> The study of shape isn’t about how to avoid fights, but how to
> enter them only on your own, well-positioned terms.
>
The key factors in close fighting are liberties, eye shape, and connections. The quickest way to lose a local fight is to reduce your own liberties by clumsy play. The common patterns of liberty shortage are fairly easy to pick up. On the other hand detailed discussion of connections takes up > much time in an introduction to shape.
>
> Some principles on liberties in close fighting:
> 0. adding a stone to a chain normally adds one or two liberties, of which your opponent can fill one next turn;
> 0. it may hard to recover from losing a liberty; so avoid all unmotivated pushing into the opponent;
> 0. false eyes and hanging connections can cause loss of apparent liberties, as in the last example; the same is true of bamboo joints.
>
> At various times in games you will have to worry about:
> 0. whether you can connect (many difficult aspects);
> 0. whether you should connect, and how then to do it;
> 0. whether you can cut, and how best to cut;
> 0. cuts leading to weak groups and running fights;
> 0. peeps, i.e. threats to cut, and how to answer them.
> These all may involve shape reasoning. Ambition always
stretches out, for extra efficiency; the usual reason for holding back is that you may be cut. (There is also fear of > invasion.)
>
> Shape that is capable of making eyes attracts the attention of all experienced players. Some reserve eye shape in groups increases the range of possibilities for fighting in a given part of the board; while taking care of a group that is only just alive may be quite constraining on your other projects. The subject of eye shape is complicated. There are good reasons why whole books are devoted to life — and-death, especially on the sides and in the corners — and in the centre context becomes crucial.
>
> Always pay close attention to context in fights (neighbouring stones, influence, the side of the board); theoretical good shape is a big help, but isn’t enough on its own.