## Around the table shape

The table shape from 1.1 was given without much explanation. That is typical of unadorned comments ‘it’s good shape’. This section looks at two ways forward from there.

## Adjusting a single stone

<!-- fig. 2.3.1 -->
The marked Black stone is most often better placed where it is, rather than at any of A, B, C, D. Why is that? For example A makes an empty triangle shape, not intrinsically a good idea.

The shape made with D is comparable with the bamboo joint. You could say that A and D are too close to the other black stones, so they may be less efficient than the other three plays. On the other hand B and C may turn out to be too far away. If that’s the case then the marked stone achieves a kind
of balance.

However that’s not the whole story. The shape made with C turned out to be good shape when seen in 1.4 and 1.5. It occurs also in the problems, later. The shape made with A is in 3.5L, in a very particular pattern. The shape made with D is very important (for example in Chapter 8). Perhaps only the shape after B is really unusual, and relatively rare as a good shape; when it occurs on the next page it is too loose.

### Development and foresight

Stones are placed one by one on the board. Any shape more complex than the diagonal or jumps must be put together in full realisation that the opponent may intervene. The first ideas about shape may come from static patterns;
but there is the underlying process to worry about, too.

<!-- fig. 2.3.2 -->
We study this portion of the table shape. It contains three stones, but feels incomplete as it stands. It is expected to occur with some White stones, which might be distributed round it in a number of ways. The discussion of whether the Black stones are properly placed and connected becomes
interesting and not too simple-minded.

<!-- fig. 2.3.3 -->
Now add some White stones, to reduce the level of abstraction, and bring in possible tactical variations. The development in the left-hand diagram is quite normal (more on this in Chapter 5).

<!-- fig. 2.3.4 -->
Black 5 makes a very solid shape (right), which is only confirmed when White plays 6 and Black answers at 7 for a bamboo joint.

<!-- fig. 2.3.5 -->
The looser choice of Black 5 here can bring some redundancy or leave future trouble. (Left) Here 5 and 7 are too close to each other, and Black’s shape is somewhat inefficient.

<!-- fig. 2.3.6 -->
(Right) The placement play 8 leaps to the eye. It is a skilful way later for White to cut Black.

Let’s ask why, though, this play White 8 is visibly on a vital point. It could be one of two reasons:

0. This is the point to complete the double table shape of 1.1.
0. This is the way to make an eye-stealing relationship with the white stone played as 6.

If you think about it, the first reason is related to eye shape too. So here is one way in which shape study isn’t so simple: eye shape may be involved in what at first sight is mainly a question of keeping connected.


<!-- fig. 2.3.7 -->
If White had reacted more passively with 2 here, Black could jump to 3. (Left) An efficient result for Black. How dangerous is 3?

<!-- fig. 2.3.8 -->
Perhaps White might resist with 4 (right). The meaning of the plays up to 14 isn’t hard to understand. Who has the advantage in this fight? After Black 15 it seems that the two black groups will be better developed; it isn’t
so important that Black has sacrificed one stone.

When there are a number of weak groups in the centre of the board, the balance of dynamic factors in the fighting is the most important thing. One of those factors is the good shape of groups, for running away or eyes.

<!-- fig. 2.3.9 -->
Here 3 is odd: White will take the key point 4.

<!-- fig. 2.3.10 -->
(Right) A horrible result. Although Black remains connected, this shape has an empty triangle signalling inefficiency, and also a white stone sitting on a key eye shape point, generally called an angle point in relation to Black 5 (4.8, 4.9).