## Empty triangles — every dog has its day

<!-- fig. 2.2.1 -->
Those who have learned as axiomatic that the empty triangle – this marked Black shape, in which the point A isn’t occupied by a White stone – is a bad shape, may be surprised later to find that it has some possible advantages. From the point of view of the previous section, that’s a matter of seeing how it matches the needs of the position.

<!-- fig. 2.2.2 -->
To start with, two reasons that the empty triangle is considered a bad shape.

Firstly, it is inefficient. If Black makes the diagonal shape in the diagram, the two stones are already connected.

<!-- fig. 2.2.3 -->
If White plays 1 in the right-hand diagram Black can connect with 2; and vice versa.

<!-- fig. 2.2.4 -->
<!-- fig. 2.2.5 -->
Secondly the shape formed is short of liberties. Three stones in a line (left) have an initial eight liberties. In the empty triangle (right) they have only seven. This difference may appear to be quite small, but soon makes itself felt in any close fighting.

<!-- fig. 2.2.5 -->
<!-- fig. 2.2.6 -->
This shape has two empty triangles in it, and has no extra liberties to show for the fourth stone.

The 2x2 block is just as short of liberties, but is also very clearly an inefficient shape that uses stones badly.

<!-- fig. 2.2.7 -->
### Some practical cases.

Gross inefficiency: Black should just play 1 at 7.

<!-- fig. 2.2.8 -->
Black 1 is wrong and White 2 kills the corner; Black could live by playing the key point 2 (cf. 4.6).

<!-- fig. 2.2.9 -->
For contrast, two examples of empty triangles as fine shape. Black 2 avoids being shut in.

<!-- fig. 2.2.10 -->
If Black cannot fight the _ko_, this play 1 starts to looks good after White A, Black B.

While an empty triangle is bad shape more often than not, it seems impossible to give an exhaustive list of cases where it may qualify as good shape.
