## Compound shapes reference collection

### The big bend

<!-- fig. 3.5.1 -->
The other way to combine two one-point jumps. It
is very often seen with a White stone at the fourth
corner of the square.

<!-- fig. 3.5.2 -->
The obvious flaw in this shape is the double peeping play White 1. When this position occurs on the side of the board, Black has the tactical resource at 6. White then may find it impossible to gain from the cut at 5.

<!-- fig. 3.5.3 -->
(Left) If White moves out in the centre with 7 and 9, Black can bridge under with 12. Normally this fight will go well for Black.

<!-- fig. 3.5.4 -->
(Right) Outright resistance with White 7 in this diagram is a simple failure.

> <!-- fig. 3.5.5 -->
> The bend itself, such as Black 1 in this diagram, is a basic shape learned early in everyone’s go career. It can make a large change both in territorial terms, and in the balance of influence.

### The bulge

<!-- fig. 3.5.6 -->
This shape is powerful in one direction, but has an
obvious weakness in the other, at the point completing the potential eye. Its orientation relative to the edge may matter. Called also ‘the cat’s face’.

<!-- fig. 3.5.7 -->
This shape is 75% of a ponnuki, but that doesn’t imply it should be developed into one. (Left) Here White 1 is good, even though Black can then peep at A.

<!-- fig. 3.5.8 -->
(Right) White 1 and 3 make a resilient shape to fight ko with 5.

<!-- fig. 3.5.9 -->
(Left) This hanging connection White 1 is excellent shape as a prelude to a pushing battle in the centre.

<!-- fig. 3.5.10 -->
(Right) White 5 creates the bulge shape. White will answer Black 6 at A or B, avoiding White C and an empty triangle.

<!-- fig. 3.6.11 -->
Black 5 here is powerful, preventing White forming a bulge shape (from a game Sakata-Takemiya).

### Attack with the knight’s move

<!-- fig. 3.6.12 -->
This is the classic attacking pattern, in cases when
the opponent has no time to cut through.

<!-- fig. 3.6.13 -->
There are in fact two ways of leaning in such an attack. (Left) Black builds a framework to the right by direct pressure.

<!-- fig. 3.6.14 -->
(Right) Black may appear to be falling back, but is actually attacking by keeping ahead of White (cf. 4.9).

Rapid attacks like these naturally leave behind some weaknesses for Black