## Tactical aspects of connections

This chapter goes into problems of developing your stones, taking into account short range effects. When it comes to ladders, loose ladders or nets, ‘close range’ has to be taken with a pinch of salt.


<!-- fig. 3.1.1 -->
<!-- fig. 3.1.2 -->
In these simple cases, attempted cutting plays fail to basic tactics.

<!-- fig. 3.1.3 -->
If you look, this shape is made up of two pairs of stones a knight’s move apart. A single knight’s move may be cut, depending on a ladder. The examples above show that the
third stone in the formation is well placed for these ladders
(which become a very short ladder, and a net). There are
further cuts to try, of course.

<!-- fig. 3.1.4 -->
Sometimes much deeper reading is required. In this example, does Black 1 work?

<!-- fig. 3.1.5 -->
(Right) There are two important variations to take into account. Black must answer White 8 at 9, not A or else White can capture in a loose ladder with 12 and B. White 10 requires a response since it threatens White A. In the end Black survives and White is indeed cut.

<!-- fig. 3.1.6-->
An example of the sort of idea professionals use to ‘work their stones harder’, to push for efficiency. This is another possible 3-3 variation, building in a different direction from sequences shown in the Introduction (White 1 jumps the other way, along the top side, in the main variation). White here has central influence and a chance to control the left-hand side. But how sound a play is 5?

<!-- fig. 3.1.7 -->
There is a ladder (left) that White might use if Black tries to cut. White’s play, however, doesn’t strictly depend on any ladder.

<!-- fig. 3.1.8 -->
If Black cuts White has in mind the possible sacrifice sequence (right), if the ladder is bad. So much central strength for White would completely change the middlegame.
This is a one-way street; it is natural for Black to push out with 15 to leave cutting points for later. Of course Black 17 can’t be omitted, and then White makes good shape with 18.

> Being able to see such sequences makes for much more flexibility; for example White needn’t worry so much about a ladderbreaker. They may involve ladders, loose ladders, nets and netting plays that turn into squeezes. In that sense fundamental capture tactics interlock with with the fundamental shape question of 2.5, “how do I connect?”