
# Close Range Play 1

Imagine you move to a large city. To begin with, you go everywhere by car or on foot. After a while you discover how to use public transport, and your life becomes a little easier if less individualistic. It is part of the experience
of coming to belong, in your urban environment.

This chapter and the two that follow it are at the heart of our conception of shape. After that, in Chapters 6 to 12, we look at special topics that relate to particular kinds of fight. But first we try to lay down the basic principles of
close range play. In order to feel ‘at home’ as a go player, one has to learn gradually the underlying map of the way stones interact. As our metaphor suggests, this may be a slow process depending on changing some habits and conforming more to the usual patterns.

The idea of fighting used in Chapter 2 needs expansion to show how shape really works. In this chapter we concentrate on monochrome (same colour) aspects of development of stones These are of two kinds:

0. one-dimensional, i.e. stretch further while remaining connected;
0. two-dimensional development, which includes future eye shape but also shape for guarding indirectly against cuts, bends and bulges, and territory-forming shapes.

In Chapter 4 the emphasis is on plays at key points of the opponent’s shape (_hane_ plays, the centre of three stones, angle plays as spoilers of eye shape). If you consistently occupy these points, or rather if your opponent allows
you to have them, you will gain great advantage in local fighting without having to capture, or even cut. Unless the two players’ knowledge of these vital points is comparable, the game may quickly look like a mismatch with one player’s formations bent back on themselves, and short of liberties and eyes; in short, like a handicap game.

Chapter 5 picks up on shapes after the main types of contact plays. It is normal for contact fights to settle matters quickly, but there are many ways. We emphasise getting off to a good start in such fights.