## Play hane at the head of three stones

<!-- fig 4.2.1 -->
<!-- fig 4.2.2 -->
The hane play Black 1 also works to put the White stones into bad shape, especially if, as in the right-hand diagram, Black can play at both ends.

<!-- fig. 4.2.3 -->
Let’s look at the effect of the double hane play in the left-hand diagram. While less forceful than the example in 4.1, it still makes White experience some discomfort.

<!-- fig. 4.2.4 -->
(Right) White can capture with 4 and 6, but 7 infiltrates the corner. After 12, Black leaves this area for later. White A may be met with Black B for a ko fight, but normally Black would play atari the other way, sacrificing without serious regrets. Here is a typical use of hane to seal off the lower edge. Up to 5 Black sets White a problem.

<!-- fig. 4.2.5 -->
(Left) It will usually be out of the question for White to go down this road, losing three stones and being cut.

<!-- fig. 4.2.6 -->
(Right) White can choose this way of sacrificing 6, depending on the usefulness of a ladder-breaker.

<!-- fig. 4.2.7 -->
(Left) If the ladder is bador awkward for Black, there is another play to try. Black 5 here is sharp: White 6 to resist (White 10 connects) will normally look poor after Black 11.

<!-- fig. 4.2.8 -->
(Right) Therefore Black may succeed in sealing off the edge with 7, at the cost of White’s improved eye shape.

<!-- fig. 4.2.9 -->
(Left) Black 9 in the previous diagram is generally preferred to a hanging connection, to minimise White’s peeping plays such as 1 and A here.

<!-- fig. 4.2.10 -->
(Right) Sometimes White may play 2 this way, an empty triangle but not so bad, to take sente and guard against the cutting sequence Black A, White B, Black C on the other side.