## Answering the attachment on top

<!-- fig. 5.3.1 -->
White’s normal answers are A to D here. (Cf. also 4.4, for a shape to avoid.)

<!-- fig. 5.3.2 -->
White at A can be said to depend on the ladder in the right-hand diagram.

<!-- fig. 5.3.3 -->
If that ladder is good for White, and Black has to play atari on top (left), White is doing well because of the cutting points marked ‘x’.

<!-- fig. 5.3.4 -->
(Right) White at B simplifies the development to a trade of influence. When White answers at C, two standard patterns may occur.

<!-- fig. 5.3.5 -->
(Left) The attach-block shape made by Black 3 is a corner opening, in which Black 7 is important to guard the ‘nose’ weakness in the corner (see 4.3).

<!-- fig. 5.3.6 -->
(Right) The attach-extend pattern again, which was met in 5.2 in another form.

<!-- fig. 5.3.7 -->
<!-- fig. 5.3.8 -->
To understand the attach-extend pattern in gain line terms, compare it with the capping play (marked stone). You can say Black has moved over the gain line, but has also made stronger shape, and given White a cutting point.

<!-- fig. 5.3.9 -->
Before extending in the attach-extend pattern, one can play the bulge point (3 in the left-hand diagram). In this case, Black leaves behind the useful cutting sequence Black A, White B, Black C.

<!-- fig. 5.3.10 -->
(Right) There is this possible capturing race in prospect. White 6 saves the corner, but Black is able to play useful moves on the outside affecting the marked White stone.

White’s answer D makes it easy for Black to take the bulge point.

<!-- fig. 5.3.11 -->
(Left) Black 1 here is a recognised play when Black is trying to make White overconcentrated on the lower edge (more on this in 7.2).

<!-- fig. 5.3.12 -->
(Right) Black 1 is a light idea, suitable for some defensive fights.