## Answering the outside attachment

<!-- fig. 5.2.1 -->
When Black plays 1, White has a choice of answers A to D.

<!-- fig. 5.2.2 -->
The right-hand diagram, after White plays A, leads to a cross-cut fight (7.1).

<!-- fig. 5.2.3 -->
(Left) Answer B is a butting play (4.5) and therefore usually bad shape.

<!-- fig. 5.2.4 -->
(Right) After C Black may continue with P, Q, R, S or T.

<!-- fig. 5.2.5 -->
Answer P allows White to give Black an empty triangle (left), but does consolidate over the gain line. This pattern is sometimes seen, when both the initial stones are on the third line.

<!-- fig. 5.2.6 -->
After Q, which is a more normal idea, White can connect solidly (right); but might also play any of the ‘x’ points instead to cover the cut indirectly, or stick out at ‘y’.

<!-- fig. 5.2.7 -->
(Left) A normal idea is for Black to extend at 1, one way into the basic attach-extend pattern. Black 3 at A causes bad shape for both.

<!-- fig. 5.2.8 -->
(Right) Answer S is a special purpose technique, used here to live quickly.

<!-- fig. 5.2.9 -->
(Left) White should play atari at 2, and let Black live small and in gote. Black A later will be big.

<!-- fig. 5.2.10 -->
(Right) This is a typical case of response T. White 4 seems to allow Black life too easily, considering that Black played
away here. These two examples belong with the material of 12.1.

<!-- fig. 5.2.11 -->
There remains to look at White 2 in the left-hand diagram here, answer D from the original list. When White is attacking, and Black defending, White may choose this way to give Black the minimum of help. If White needs the
point 2 anyway, this is theoretically sound (cf. 13.2).

<!-- fig. 5.2.12 -->
(Right) White may now continue with 4 at any one of A to D in this diagram; but Black has been helped towards good shape with 3, and White’s cutting point remains.