## Windmills to pancakes

<!-- fig. 7.1.1 -->
There are a number of fundamental patterns in cross-cut fights.

<!-- fig. 7.1.2 -->
The first is the plain extension Black 1 here. Proverbially, it is better from Black than any of the four ways to play atari: Cross-cut? Extend!

<!-- fig. 7.1.3 -->
The point is that Black 1 in the left-hand diagram turns out badly, if Black needs 3 also, and White can capture in a ladder.

<!-- fig. 7.1.4 -->
The windmill.

<!-- fig. 7.1.5 -->
(Left) Black 2 is an overplay, unless Black is already strong locally. Black 6 completes the windmill shape, which gives each of the struggling groups four liberties.

<!-- fig. 7.1.6 -->
(Right) White gains the advantage simply by developing on
each side. Black 14 leaves the Black corner small and vulnerable (White at A is ko), while Black also has a weak group in the centre to worry about.

<!-- fig. 7.1.7 -->
(Left) Black 2 here is also normally an overplay.

<!-- fig. 7.1.8 -->
(Right) With the marked pincer stone in place, though, White 1 is questionable. The _ponnuki_ plus one stone isn’t efficient. If White played 5 at 6, and Black played 6 at 5, the windmill development would be assessed in Black’s favour (the lower White group has to work hard for life, the central Black group is relatively strong).

<!-- fig. 7.1.9 -->
<!-- fig. 7.1.10 -->
This T-shape (left) and asymmetric shape (right) also come up, in close fighting. Naturally Black 3 creates a shortage of liberties, for both sides.

<!-- fig. 7.1.11 -->
Here (left) White 1 is clearly better than allowing Black to play at 3. Next should Black play A, B, or C?

<!-- fig. 7.1.12 -->
(Right) The idea of Black at A: sacrifice one stone and attack in the centre. White 2 is bad when White is already alive.

<!-- fig. 7.1.13 -->
The problem with the hanging connection at B is that Black may need also to play at A, anyway (left).

<!-- fig. 7.1.14 -->
If Black omits 3 in the left-hand diagram, White 2 and 4 (right) are powerful. (See 9.1 for more on this pattern.)

<!-- fig. 7.1.15 -->
Therefore in some cases (though not this particular one, where White is strong already on the edge), the solid connection C (left) may be best. It keeps White weak on both sides, even though it is not intrinsically good shape.

<!-- fig. 7.1.16 -->
(Right) We call this extreme example of shortage of liberties a pancake. The next page has some cases leading towards it. Naturally enough the fighting can become most difficult.

<!-- fig. 7.1.17 -->
<!-- fig. 7.1.18 -->
This might happen in the example from 5.6. However White finds it easy to exploit Black’s lack of liberties, so Black 1 is the wrong way to fight.

<!-- fig. 7.1.19 -->
<!-- fig. 7.1.20 -->
Fighting along these lines can break out in several different openings, leading to pancake-like continuations. To play the cut at 2, Black really needs a stone in support as shown, or on one of the ‘x’ points, and also a favourable
ladder. White’s plan with 5 and 7, up to 17 (and relying on A) must fail. If Black has to play 8 at 9 to move out, no good can come of it.

<!-- fig. 7.1.20 -->
<!-- fig. 7.1.21 -->
When White plays 5 in this way, it has the intention of forcing Black into a low position. The marked Black stone ends up on a good point after 18; if it had been on the fourth line instead, this variation would be questionable
for Black. This is an example of a fight highly dependent on context, with a ladder running north-east and stones to the west mattering greatly.