##  Doing the necessary, or losing the plot?

The central character in Pushkin’s _Queen of spades_ is led to his downfall by overriding his cherished principle, of ‘not risking the necessary to gain the superfluous’. In go, it is often hard to understand how to distinguish the two. One aspect of improving your strength is to shed all unnecessary plays. In a sense this is more important than making good shape. The gain in making the correct shape may only be a couple of points, compared with the secondbest play. Some misdirected moves are almost completely wasted

It is common to characterise inferior moves as 80% or 50% of full value, and so on. An amateur 1 _dan_ probably plays 90% moves, on average over the game; top players operate at around 98% or 99% efficiency. These figures do assume that perfect play in go resembles what can be seen in professional go. This is simply a hypothesis, extrapolating from the current state of knowledge, and it is hard to see how to test it.

What are the most common causes of wasted plays? High on
the list are:
0. playing to save a group that is already alive;
0. threatening a group with a play that isn’t in fact sente;
0. capturing stones that have no strategic meaning;
0. defending territory that is badly located (e.g. open-
 skirted);
0. carrying on in a set sequence through momentum alone.

General classes of mistakes are safety plays (nothing safe about playing badly), miscalculations about the burden of proof (if a forcing play isn’t clearly forcing and clearly required right now, it is quite likely to be bad), and misconceptions about which are the key areas or stones.